Good evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the NEWSHOUR tonight:
A vow to defeat ISIS. President Obama looks
ahead to his final year in office, in his
end of 2015 news conference.
It's Friday. Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to analyze what the president said
and the rest of the week's news.
And, we head to the set of "Downton Abbey"
for a look at how the British drama has captivated
American audiences.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
ELIZABETH MCGOVERN, ACTRESS: The one extraordinary
difference is that, every word is written
by one man. I don't know of any other television
show that works that way. And I, to this day,
find it absolutely mindboggling.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: All that and more on tonight's PBS
NEWSHOUR.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: From President Obama today, a year-end
promise to target terror in the year to come.
He spoke at a White House news conference,
and sought again to allay public fears of
potential attacks. At home, he called for
Americans to stay vigilant, and overseas,
he promised to pound away at the Islamic State
group.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
ISIL's already lost about 40 percent of the
populated areas it once controlled in Iraq,
and it's losing territory in Syria. Now, squeezing
ISIL's heart, its core in Syria and Iraq,
will make it harder for them to pump their
terror and propaganda to the rest of the world.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: We'll have an extended report on
the president's remarks on terrorism and a
number of other subjects after the news summary.
In the day's other news, Wall Street went
down hard. The sell-off was driven by falling
oil prices, the Chinese economy and foreign
reaction to the Federal Reserve's interest
rate hike. and, losses accelerated late as
a variety of option contracts expired.
In the end, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
lost nearly 370 points, to close below 17,130,
the NASDAQ fell almost 80 points, and the
S&P 500 dropped 36. For the week, the Dow
lost nearly 1 percent. The NASDAQ and the
S&P lost a fraction of a percent.
Congress finished work today on sweeping tax
cut and government funding bills, and headed
home for the holidays. The Senate gave final
approval to a package that includes more than
a trillion dollars in new federal spending
for 2016, plus $680 billion in tax cuts over
the next decade.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), MAJORITY LEADER:
We're proving you can actually enact significant
long-term reforms, achieve conservative policy
goals, and get them signed into law. So, I'm
proud of what the new Senate has accomplished.
I'd like to thank the many friends across
the aisle who joined us in passing so many
bipartisan reforms for the American people.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), MINORITY LEADER: Months
ago, Democrats called on Republicans to work
with us to craft a budget agreement. We outlined
three goals. We wanted to get rid of sequestration.
We were able to do that. We wanted to make
sure there was parity between defense and
the middle class. We wanted to make sure we
kept these poison pill riders off the legislation.
All three goals we had, we accomplished.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The budget deal already passed in
the House in separate votes yesterday and
today. And later, President Obama signed the
legislation into law.
European Union leaders vowed today to wage
an "uncompromising fight" against terror.
Their summit in Brussels was the first time
the 28 leaders have met since the November
attacks in Paris, claimed by the Islamic State
group. The group agreed to beef up immigration
controls, to crack down on gun-running and
to freeze financial assets of extremist groups.
More than 990,000 migrants have entered Europe
this year from Africa or the Middle East,
and there is still no end in sight. The International
Organization for Migration put out the new
estimate today, and said more than half are
from Syria. In Geneva, a spokesman said people
keep coming, despite temperatures getting
colder and sea conditions growing more dangerous.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JOEL MILLMAN, SPOKESMAN, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
OF MIGRATION: The flows are so strong, even
now, this late in the year, that perhaps by
Tuesday, or even before then, IOM estimates
that the million person mark will pass. This
is almost five times last year's level, which
is extraordinary.
(EDN VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The agency also reports at least
760 migrants have died so far this year, with
more than half of those in just the last two
months alone.
Prospects for peace in Yemen hit a new stumbling
block today. Talks in Switzerland were halted
after Shiite Houthi rebels suspended all meetings
with Yemen's government. The Houthis blamed
repeated violations of a cease-fire in Yemen.
Both sides have ignored the truce, and troops
loyal to the government captured a provincial
capital today, after two days of fighting.
In Iraq, the U.S. military says Kurdish forces
backed by heavy coalition air strikes beat
back two major Islamic State attacks this
week. In the north, 500 fighters tried to
breach Kurdish positions, and at least 180
were killed. In the west, others attacked
government lines outside Ramadi.
The briefer spoke on a video link from Baghdad:
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
COL. STEVEN WARREN, U.S. ARMY: In each place,
ISIL was able to muster an offensive effort,
which tells us that they've still got some
fight left in them. However, and much more
importantly, in each fight Iraqi forces were
able to rebuff ISIL's efforts.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Defense Secretary Ash
Carter spent the day in Afghanistan, promising
U.S. support in the face of a growing Islamic
State presence there. Carter's one-day visit
came after the U.S. commander in Afghanistan
warned that ISIS militants from Syria and
Iraq are gathering in the east. They're joining
like-minded Afghans to gain a foothold there.
In the U.S. presidential race, the Bernie
Sanders campaign accused the Democratic National
Committee today of actively aiding frontrunner
Hillary Clinton. The dispute began with an
accidental breach of the DNC's database for
voters. For half an hour, Sanders staffers
then allegedly used it to access some of Clinton's
voter data and the DNC has now cut off the
Sanders access to all of its records.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JEFF WEAVER, SANDERS CAMPAIGN MANAGER: The
leadership of the DNC is now actively attempting
to undermine our campaign. This is unacceptable.
Clearly in this case, it looks like they are
trying to help the Clinton campaign.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The Sanders campaign fired its data
director for misusing the Clinton voter information.
And later, it filed suit to regain access
to the Democratic voter data. For its part,
the DNC rejected the accusation that it's
playing favorites.
The Chicago policeman who fatally shot a black
teenager last year had his first court appearance
today since being indicted. Jason Van Dyke
is charged with first-degree murder and official
misconduct. Police video released last month
shows him shooting Laquan McDonald sixteen
times. It triggered protests, it forced the
police chief to quit, and prompted federal
investigations.
And China's capital city is now under its
second smog red alert this month. The wave
of airborne pollution is forecast to hit Beijing
from Saturday into Tuesday. Today, signs warned
people of the risk and ordered half the city's
cars off the road.
Officials said particle levels will be more
than 20 times what is considered safe by the
World Health Organization.
Still to come on the NEWSHOUR: The president's
priorities for his last year in office; a
resolution for peace in Syria; Mark Shields
and David Brooks on the week's news, and much
more.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Back now to President Obama's final
news conference of 2015. Today's session in
the White House briefing room was a combination
year-in-review and year-to-come.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
OBAMA: As I look back on this year, the one
thing I see is that so much of our steady,
persistent work over the years is paying off
for the American people in big, tangible ways.
WOODRUFF: It was an upbeat assessment from
a president soon to enter his final year in
office. He claimed a list of successes -- among
them, job growth and a surge of sign-ups for
health care coverage -- and he promised more
to come.
OBAMA: For all the very real progress America's
made over the past seven years, we still have
some unfinished business. And I plan on doing
everything I can with every minute of every
day that I have left as president, to deliver
on behalf of the American people. Since taking
this office, I have never been more optimistic
about a year ahead than I am right now. And
in 2016, I'm going to leave it out all on
the field.
WOODRUFF: At the same time, Mr. Obama acknowledged
the growing challenge of confronting terrorism
at home and abroad, after the attacks in Paris
and San Bernardino, California.
Even so, he vowed to defeat the Islamic State
group.
OBAMA: And we're going to do so by systematically
squeezing them, cutting off their supply lines,
cutting off their financing, taking out their
leadership, taking out their forces, taking
out their infrastructure.
Now, in order for us to stamp them out thoroughly,
we have to eliminate lawless areas in which
they cannot still roam. So, we can disable
them, we can dismantle much of their infrastructure
and greatly reduce the threat that they pose
to the United States our allies and our neighbors.
Our long term goal has to be to stabilize
areas so that they don't have any safe haven.
And in order for us to do that in Syria, there
has to be an end to the civil war.
WOODRUFF: Today, in fact, the U.N. Security
Council approved a resolution that outlines
a process for a limited cease-fire in Syria,
and peace talks. The U.S. wants the ouster
of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, while
Russia supports him.
But President Obama made clear Assad is still
a central problem.
OBAMA: Assad is going to have to leave in
order for the country to stop the blood letting
and for all the parties involved to be able
to move forward in a nonsectarian way. And
I do think that you've seen from the Russians
a recognition that after a couple of months,
they're not really moving the needle that
much, despite sizable deployment inside of
Syria. And, of course, that's what I suggested
would happen, because there is only so much
bombing you can do when an entire country
is outraged and believes that its ruler doesn't
represent them.
WOODRUFF: The news conference also came just
days after more than 190 nations reached a
landmark deal on arresting climate change.
The president brushed aside Republican opposition
to the deal.
OBAMA: Right now, the American Republican
Party is the only major party that I can think
of in the advanced world that effectively
denies climate change. I mean, it's an outlier.
So, my sense is, is this is something that
may be an advantage in terms of short term
politics in the Republican primary; it's not
something that is going to be a winner for
Republicans long term.
WOODRUFF: On the other hand, the president
praised Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan's
work on crafting the 2016 budget compromise.
OBAMA: It was a good win. And there are some
things in there that I don't like, but that's
the nature of legislation and compromise.
And I think the system worked. That gives
me some optimism that next year, on a narrow
set of issues, we can get some more work done.
WOODRUFF: Later, the president and his family
left Washington, en route to California and
a meeting with families of the San Bernardino
attack victims. From there, it's on to Hawaii
for the holidays.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
SUBTITLE: Calvin Coolidge averaged 73 press
conferences per year, Ronald Reagan averaged
6, and Barack Obama averages 20.
WOODRUFF: As we just reported, late this afternoon,
the 15 nations on the United Nations Security
Council voted unanimously to endorse a framework
for a peace process in Syria, after nearly
five years of brutal civil war that's left
more than 250,000 dead and millions displaced.
For more, we go to Hari Sreenivasan.
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR: And with me
to explore the details of this deal, what's
at stake, and the long road to this point
is chief foreign affairs correspondent Margaret
Warner.
So, we've seen the headline during the day.
How significant is this?
MARGARET WARNER, PBS NEWSHOUR CHIEF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT: This is a very deal,
Hari. You've got all the members of the
Security Council, not just the members to
have the region who have been involved in
this, but all the members of the Security
Council, some of who vehemently disagreed
about the future of Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad, to agree on resolutions setting
up the process that will set up not only a
ceasefire between Assad and many of his opposition
groups on the ground but direct talks between
the two of them. And it now has the imprimatur
of the U.N. Security Council, and Ban Ki-moon,
the secretary general, committed to help implement
it.
SREENIVASAN: So, there'd been a lot of countries
working toward this, but there are four major
players and smack-dab in the middle of all
this is Bashar al-Assad.
WARNER: That's right. The major division among
many concerns his future. On one side, you've
got the United States and the Gulf states
who began all this wanting Assad gone as soon
as possible, and both have supported opposition
groups on the ground in different ways. But
on the other side you've got Russia and Iran,
both of them regard Syria, and Syria is a
client state for different reasons. Both of
them have sent military assistance weapons
advisors, even fighters, and in Russia's case
bombs, to try to shore him up.
SREENIVASAN: And there's tensions between
the United States and Russia.
WARNER: Yes, that's very true. Then you
have another cross-cutting tension between
the U.S. and Russia, which would be for influence
in this process. For a long time, Russia wasn't
very involved and then it inserted itself
in September by beginning this bombing, and
won itself a place at the table, because they
want influence over the outcome.
SREENIVASAN: And Saudi Arabia and Iran have
their tensions.
WARNER: They certainly do. And, in fact, that's
part of the knob of all of this. Saudi Arabia,
leader of the Sunni states in this region,
and Iran, of course, Shiite state, huge historical
rivalry for primacy in this region.
SREENIVASAN: All right. So, what do peace
players all actually get over their disagreements
and agree to?
WARNER: Which really is incredible. I think
it's two things, Hari. One is threat of
international terrorism. Even the Chinese
foreign minister this to reporters today,
we've got to get the process going because
of threat of international terrorism.
They have come to the conclusion that they
can never take on ISIS until the boil of the
Syrian conflict, until they launch that boil.
That remember was the original, not only attracter
but incubator of all of the thousands of foreign
fighters coming in, helping beef up this al
Qaeda in Iraq that became ISIS, helping them
establish them this caliphate in the ungoverned
portion of eastern Syria and roll on into
Iraq and they recognize there's no way to
take them on.
The second thing that they've agreed on is
that, militarily, it can't be solved. Every
one of them, these four countries, has supported
different groups on the ground and they now
all realize they have been sucked into a quagmire.
There is no military resolution, has to be
political.
SREENIVASAN: All right. So, one thing at the
dead center of all this is Assad. The next
steps here, this agreement doesn't mention
him by name, which is one of those central
tensions you mentioned.
WARNER: Absolutely, and they had to do it
that way because the differences remain and
so they had to finesse it. They talk about
a political transition. The United States
believes if you have a transition to an inclusive
nonsectarian government which is its language
they've agreed on, there is no way an autocrat
for minority Alawites can be head of that
government, so they think you'll eventually
get to that point and the Russians have signaled
the United States they're not so much wedded
to Assad as the idea of a unitary state.
So the steps are a very, very tall order,
which is to set up both the ceasefire in January
and these direct talks. I think it's going
to be very hard. There are other disagreements,
including who gets to sit in for the opposition.
This is just one step in other words of trying
to maintain the momentum to get to the political
resolution.
SREENIVASAN: And getting to the cease fire,
you have to know who's on which side of the
table.
WARNER: Right.
SREENIVASAN: I mean, who exactly is the enemy
of Assad, which countries think should be
at the table.
WARNER: Very important point.
The opposition which have never agreed on
anything finally had a meeting in Riyadh a
week ago and they actually chose the group
that then will choose the group to sit at
the table, OK? It's very indirect.
But meanwhile, all these other countries,
all of them, have different candidates that
they want to nominate for too much of the
terrorist to be at the table. So, they include
some groups that have been clients of Iran,
some of them clients of Saudi Arabia. All
of that is still unresolved. Jordan is supposed
to be coordinating this, poor Jordan, so that
all remains to be÷}ijf÷ resolved.
SREENIVASAN: So, big first step today.
But thank you very much, Margaret Warner.
WARNER: My pleasure.
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: Stay with us. Coming up on the NEWSHOUR:
cooking lessons for the homeless; and "“Downton
Abbey"”, its coming final season.
But first, to the analysis of Shields and
Brooks. That is syndicated columnist Mark
Shields, and "“New York Times"” columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, we've been listening to -- we heard
Margaret just now talking to Hari about the
Syria -- what may be Syrian progress.
Let's talk about the president. He had a news
conference today, David. But look at his record.
I mean, he said we're making progress, there's
still challenges. It says at the end of this
yore, how have his policies worked in Syria,
against ISIS, in Iraq, you know, in both countries?
DAVID BROOKS, THE NEW YORK TIMES: Yes, there
are a couple of layers here. The first one
is, he said quite accurately, we can't stop
all the lone wolves. You had a couple out
there in San Bernardino. Obviously, we can't
stop that.
Are we making progress? He claims we are.
That's highly disputed. ISIS remains magnetic.
They're drawing more forces, sometimes they
take ground, sometimes they lose ground, it's
not clear that we're necessarily making progress
against him.
The third thing and the biggest backdrop is,
we've just had for six years, an existentially
weak policy in that area. You know, he drew
a red line with Assad, he ignored it, he was
asked by people in his own administration
to be more aggressive with ISIS, early on,
he wasn't.
In my view, we left Iraq too early and destabilized
the region. So, the existential issue is one
of passivity. And so, we made some progress
recently, but I would not -- but he's arguing
from a place of weakness because of the things
-- the mistakes that were made in the past.
WOODRUFF: Existentially weak position?
MARK SHIELDS, SYNDICATED COLUMNIST: Yes, rather
than relitigate that, I mean, 14 years of
war, there is no appetite in this country
for military intervention in the Middle East.
The president, I think, most recently has
been caught flat-footed in understandable
change in public interest, priorities and
concerns. I mean, you have the Russian airliner,
vacation civilians shot down by the same group
that then has the attack on Paris and paralyzes
the great city at night and then it's followed
up at least by disciples in San Bernardino
massacring civilians at a Christmas party.
It's understandable switch, a sea change
in American attitude and concerns, and from
the economy and jobs, to personal safety and
survival and concern about terrorism. The
White House, the president in particular,
just didn't pick that up. I don't know why.
WOODRUFF: Why not?
SHIELDS: I don't know why, somebody suggested,
disdain for cable news that -- or whatever,
I don't know. But he didn't. What's been missing,
I would suggest, rather than policy, because
Norman Schwarzkopf, the great general, said
it doesn't take courage to order men into
battle, it does take courage to go into battle.
The opposition right now is talking loosely
about going in, and getting tough and kicking
tail and all the rest of it, but what is missing
is any sense of resoluteness, or strength
of the president. He talks about it like he's
talking about the gross domestic product and
how it's grown and interest rates.
There isn't, to me, anyway --
BROOKS: I agree. He hasn't reflected the fear
people feel, the concern people feel, that
-- even the anger and outrage people feel.
SHIELDS: Yes.
BROOKS: But that's because of who -- he
who says A must say B. And so, if you don't
want to get to -- if he says A, outrage, serious
problem, you have to have a new and aggressive
policy, which he doesn't want to have. He
believes in the current policy. It's a moderately
aggressive, maybe. But if he wanted to step
up the rhetoric, he'd have to step up the
action and he doesn't want to step up the
reaction, therefore, he can't say really,
verbalize much.
WOODRUFF: Well, how do you measure resoluteness?
I mean, Mark, you're saying because of his
demeanor, he seems low key. Is that how you
measure whether someone is on a course they
believe in and they're going to stick with?
SHIELDS: Well, I mean, he was caught, Judy,
the president was caught on the red line,
drawing the red line in Syria.
WOODRUFF: A few years ago in Syria.
SHIELDS: I mean, that was -- and so -- and
there is a retreat from that. And, he, you
know, whether through bad luck or just bad
judgment or bad information, he's equated
ISIS to how much geography it holds, and that
isn't the fear and the fear isn't whether
in fact they do own more acreage or dominate
more acreage, or more towns and cities, quite
bluntly, to Americans. It's the potential
for real damage and anxiety in this country.
And then he made the reference to them as
junior varsity. I mean, it was the sense that,
you know, he didn't understand or didn't
at least project an understanding of the real
risk that these folks presented.
What he has come from now is the Republicans
do not have any difference in -- with the
exception of Lindsey Graham who says we have
--
WOODRUFF: You mean the candidates.
SHIELDS: Yes.
BROOKS: I'm not sure I agree with that.
I mean, the speeches that were given -- the
Obama speeches, compare to the Hillary Clinton
speeches, Hillary Clinton laid out a comprehensive
plan with multi-prongs on how to deal with
Syria, which is much more aggressive than
anything Obama is doing. Marco Rubio and Jeb
Bush were not as specific as Clinton but basically
it overlaps a lot of what Clinton with a few
extra things. And Obama hasn't even done that
far. He hasn't laid out a comprehensive plan.
Those three, Clinton, Rubio, Bush, have basically
said the Sunnis themselves have to take out
ISIS with American -- Western air support,
and that means defanging Assad, because the
Sunnis won't do it as long as they're being
barrel bombed.
And so, that's a strategy. And Obama hasn't
likely gone there even. And so, there is been
a vacuity as to how he's talking about the
issue.
WOODRUFF: But how do you -- how does the president
acknowledge that without giving into what's
now described as a climate of fear where everything
is something to be afraid of and Americans
should be really rattled by what's happened
in San Bernardino?
SHIELDS: Well, I mean, I think a good part
of it is the tone, the sense of resoluteness
or not. I mean, whether it's Churchill or
whatever. I mean, words do matter.
But where I disagree with David is, you know,
they ask the Republicans whether it's Bush
or Rubio, oh, yes, yes, we do -- we need drones.
We need drones. The president used drones
more than anybody in the history of human
kind, with much criticism from the international
community.
We need more airstrikes. We are using airstrikes.
We need Special Forces. There are Special
Forces also, without revealing American secrets.
But nobody, nobody, with the exception of
Lindsey Graham is saying, let's go -- I
mean, Mike Huckabee says, yes, we should send
troops but I can't tell you how many because
that would be revealing. But I mean, Rubio,
they all talk tough, but they really don't
come out.
I agree with you, Hillary Clinton is the one
Democrat who does come off as more commander-in-chief-ish.
BROOKS: Yes.
WOODRUFF: Well, I want to ask about the Democrats
because, typically, people say when it comes
to national security, it plays to the strength
of the Republicans. But, David, you're saying
Hillary is holding her own in that.
BROOKS: Yes. I mean --
WOODRUFF: What about Bernie Sanders?
BROOKS: I still think it generally helps Republicans.
But if any Democrat can maintain parity, it's
going to be Hillary Clinton. People trust
her on that.
But this is a crushing blow. The shift in
the news has been a crushing blow to Bernie
Sanders. There are other good things have
happened to him. He's got a base of support.
He's gotten some endorsements. But it's
just a crushing blow.
I think this and some of the Black Lives Matter
movement are just -- don't play to the strengths.
And so, as long as the economy is number one,
inequality is number one, that's in his wheelhouse.
But especially with the attention shifting
to security, that's far out of the wheelhouse.
WOODRUFF: Do you agree?
SHIELDS: Yes, there is two profiles to the
party. I mean, the Democrats are the more
nurturing party, the party of social justice.
You ask people, who's better on education?
The Democrats. Who's better on climate change
or preserving the environment? Democrats.
Who's better for widows and orphans? Democrats.
Who's better on national security and terrorism?
The Republicans. Republicans are seen as historically
tougher. Whether in fact this is logical,
rational, these are the perceptions. So, the
Republicans have a double-digit advantage
on it.
I mean, you could go through and look for
the papers that -- observing any of those
on the stage and the only one you find is
Lindsey Graham, but they all talk a very tough
game.
WOODRUFF: But you agree Bernie Sanders has
been hurt?
(CROSSTALK)
SHIELDS: Bernie Sanders -- this is not Bernie
Sanders' natural area. He was chairman of
veterans committee, but, no, national security
is not his strength. And Hillary Clinton is
seen as somebody with steel in her spine.
She's seen as tough. She's seen as experienced.
She may not be seen as totally honest and
she may not be seen as absolutely likable,
but she is seen as tough, and experienced
and smart.
WOODRUFF: Well, there is another Democratic
issue that's come up just today, this breach
of the Democrats voter parties -- voter database.
The Sanders campaign recognized that there
was a technical glitch. They had access for
half an hour or more. They say they didn't
do anything with that information they had
access to. The Clinton campaign says they
did. The DNC has now shut down the Sanders'
camp access.
Is this -- I mean, right now, the Sanders
camp is suing the DNC, the Clinton people
are holding news conferences. Is this -- what
does this add up to, David?
BROOKS: Well, the first bad part for the Sanders
campus, they saw a window and grabbed it,
and a couple -- at least a couple of staffers
did. Not just one. A couple of staffers grabbed
some information they probably didn't have
access to.
Nonetheless, I do not think that people are
going to see Bernie Sanders as a corrupt man.
SHIELDS: Yes.
BROOKS: That is not his weak spot. So, I don't
think he'll be particularly hurt by this.
What could happen on the other hand is the
Clinton campaign is now in the midst of a
massive overreaction, on Twitter and this
press conference, massively overreacting and
making it look like they are the bully establishment.
And I don't know -- on the Republican side,
there is such a fervent anti-establishment
feel, that if somebody had a chance to run
against the RNC for that candidate, golden.
I'm not sure the Democrats are that anti-establishment.
But it sure gives Bernie Sanders an opening
to say, the big powers in Washington, along
with Hillary Clinton are sealing up this game
and trying to shut me down, and I think that's
fertile for him.
SHIELDS: Let me agree with David.
Bernie Sanders, 2 million donors. Average
contribution is $30. Nobody else is even remotely
close to that. It's a remarkable campaign.
It's gotten bigger crowds in the Republican
front runner. I mean, he's really been,
it's a remarkable candidacy.
And this -- Judy, the window is open, all
right? The curtains are up and the pretty
girl is standing there in her night gown and
the Sanders people look in. They weren't breaking
in, they weren't trying to get in but it's
available. They look at the information for
30 minutes, OK?
The Clinton people, the last thing in the
world they want to be talking about is electronic
data and computers with the Clinton email
problem.
And with Debbie Wasserman, the chair of the
Democratic National Committee having limited
the debates to five debates now --
WOODRUFF: Democratic.
SHIELDS: Democratic debates.
WOODRUFF: Right.
SHIELDS: One-half -- not even one-half as
the Republicans. It was open, free party.
Saturday night when -- Saturday night, the
lowest TV night of the week, that's when
they want it --
WOODRUFF: Another one coming up tomorrow night.
SHIELDS: Tomorrow night, to limit it. Looks
like they tilted already in Hillary Clinton's
favor.
And now she's depriving Bernie Sanders' campaign
of the one thing they have which is the information?
I mean, their campaign was a door-to-door,
person-to-person campaign and they're going
to deprive them of that? I mean, it just looks
like David against Goliath, boy, I'm rooting
for David.
WOODRUFF: So, what started out as an accusation
against the Sanders camp you're saying could
end up helping Sanders?
BROOKS: Yes, but the question is how much
anti-establishment is in the Democratic Party.
Maybe they don't mind the establishment. Yes,
I sort of like the people that run my party.
Republicans don't think that. They hate the
people that run their party. But I'm not
sure about the Democrats.
SHIELDS: Yes, I just think -- I think bullying
and unfairness. And they've already had
criticism from Tulsi Gabbard, the Democratic
vice chair of the committee, criticized Wasserman
for the limited number of debates to favor
and to tilt in the advantage of Hillary Clinton,
already. So, boy, I just think -- I think
the Clinton people are playing it dumb.
WOODRUFF: This may have increased the audience
for tomorrow night, Democratic.
SHIELDS: Let's hope.
WOODRUFF: Mark Shields, David Brooks, thank
you.
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: As the holidays approach, it is
a time of the year when many are more focused
on trying to help those in need. We have a
look at a program that helps those on hard
times learn new skills and find jobs.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: This is where rubber
meets the road, when you learn about management
and how to take care of your kitchen.
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT:
Morning class work at a well-established if
unlikely culinary school in our nation's capital;
the students, mere weeks from graduation.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: So, who can give me the
first principle of a hazard analysis critical
control point?
BROWN: It's new territory for most of them.
Some are recently homeless, others recovering
from drug and alcohol addiction, newly-released
from prison or chronically unemployed.
Located in the basement of a large homeless
shelter just blocks from the White House and
U.S. capitol, D.C. Central Kitchen is the
nation's largest community kitchen. Its full-time
professional staff, helped out by a steady
stream of volunteers, puts out 5,000 meals
a day, which are sent to homeless shelters,
schools, half-way houses and other non-profits
in the area.
Much of the kitchen's output is prepared from
donated ingredients -- produce, canned goods,
meat and fish that local restaurants and food
retailers would otherwise throw away.
MIKE CURTIN, D.C. CENTRAL KITCHEN CEO: We
do so many things, all of which however are
focused on and around the idea that waste
is wrong. And that waste could be --
BROWN: Waste is wrong?
CURTIN: Waste is wrong.
As a nation, almost 40 percent of the food
that we produce of the day goes in the garbage.
And yet, people are hungry. There's something
really, really wrong with that.
BROWN: For D.C. Central Kitchen CEO Mike Curtin,
reversing food waste is one-half the kitchen's
two-pronged mission.
CURTIN: And while we're doing that, we're
training men and women who are coming out
of incarceration, battling addiction, surviving
abuse, homelessness and unemployment for jobs
in this hospitality business. We're trying
to bring these two things together around
the same table in a way that's going to create
positive economic growth and opportunity for
everyone.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: It's better that we
start from here, because if we try to pile
(ph) this way, we're going to get tired
because we're pushing all of this --
BROWN: That means the culinary program and
its students are deeply embedded in the kitchen's
daily activities. It can be demanding, even
a little intimidating at times.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Say "thank you, chef,"
for what?
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Thank you, chef, for
straightening out my life.
UNIDENTIFIED MAEL: Any time.
BROWN: There is a kind of tough-love at work
here, and often, a bond of shared experience.
You know what this is like.
MARIANNE ALI, DIRECTOR, CULINARY TRAINING
PROGRAM: Oh, absolutely.
BROWN: Tell me what you came from.
ALI: I had a 20-year rough bout with heroin.
BROWN: Marianne Ali is director of the culinary
training program.
ALI: I would say crack saved my life, because
if it wasn't, I could have probably been
a heroin addict for longer. But crack takes
you down so fast, and I was at the bottom
of rock bottom.
BROWN: She eventually got clean, went to culinary
school, then got a job with D.C. Central Kitchen.
What did you think you could bring to it?
ALI: I knew that I could serve as an example,
you know, hopefully; that people would look
at me and say, "If she did it, then maybe
perhaps there's a chance", because recovery
is all, it's a lot about hope.
BROWN: But making a new start takes more than
knife skills and hope. Many of the changes
required of these students are personal and
take place on the inside.
ALI: How do I deal with my anger? How do I
deal with somebody who is an authority? How
do I deal with juggling, having to go see
my P.O. and being here on time and doing what
I need to do -- it's a lot to have to balance.
BROWN: Students Tamyra Hill and Terrell Nicholson
agree. She is a mother of three who's struggled
to find work in recent years.
TAMYRA HILL, CULINARY STUDENT: For me, the
hardest time is just being outside the classroom
and finding time to study and finding time
to prep for exams. Like I said, I have children;
I have to help them with their homework, and
then after they are in bed I have to take
the time to study for myself. So, for me,
that has been -- I won't say a struggle,
but it has been the part I have to constantly
work on.
BROWN: Nicholson was released from prison
not long before he came to the program.
TERRELL NICHOLSON, CULINARY STUDENT: I never
had a problem getting a job; it was keeping
it that I had a problem with because I was
going interview and get a job, and I would
work. But I would allow other influences to
keep me from staying focused.
BROWN: Teaching chefs Daniela Hurtado (ph)
and Anand Shantam see the challenges some
of their students face, trying to move from
one way of life to another.
ANAND SHANTAM, CHEF INSTRUCTOR: If you've
got someone who's been unemployed, gone through
addiction. It's hard to come into a learning
situation where they now have to get disciplined,
be on time, take constructive feedback and
not see it as criticism, but see it as an
opportunity to grow.
DANIELA HURTADO, CHEF INSTRUCTOR: Having the
right attitude. People will bump into you
yes, the right attitude. People will bump
into, and sometimes you are defensive. And
from the environment that they are coming
from, sometimes it's kind of harsh. So, it's
not personal; those are some of the challenges
that we try to deal with here.
BROWN: The culinary training program runs
14 weeks -- including a four-week internship
in local restaurants and three weeks of guided
job-search -- and it boasts a stunning 80
percent graduation rate.
Still, not everyone makes it.
CURTIN: We might find that they're not quite
ready. They haven't hit a place in their life
where they see this as a best path to take.
Addiction is a brutal mistress, and sometimes,
it takes longer for some people to work their
way out of it than others.
BROWN: The students we talked to felt they
were beginning to find their feet, and they
credited the kitchen.
NATHANIEL TROLLER, CULINARY STUDENT: I have
three kids, so I want to be the father figure
for them so they won't chase the same things
I went through in my life.
LANDRELL JORDAN, CULINARY STUDENT: Coming
in here taught me how to get into the roots
of where my anger is coming from; the pain,
it taught me how to deal with it out, as you
talk about, get it out, feel better about
myself, you know? And here I am now, I'm
doing positive, something that I love.
BROWN: What do you think is the key to making
it work? Why does it work?
CURTIN: Because we meet people where they
are. We're really not here to judge what people
have done, or where they've been, or the decisions
they've made. We're here to talk about the
future and to take what people have innately
and give that a little context and say this
is what you can do. If you work hard, if you
commit yourself, if you dedicate yourself
to this, you can be successful.
BROWN: And with 90 percent of the kitchen's
students finding jobs upon graduation, that
formula seems to be working.
From downtown Washington, D.C., I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the PBS NEWSHOUR.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: The blockbuster successful British
TV series, "“Downton Abbey"” begins its
sixth and final season here on PBS next month.
We got an inside look at the show, its creator
and explore why so many Americans love it.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: The music is instantly recognizable,
as is the tail -- that's Isis, the dog -- both
part of the opening credits to the blockbuster
British television drama, "Downton Abbey."
For the past five years, the Crawley family
and their servants have entertained us, and
in January, the drama begins its sixth and
final season on PBS.
The last chance for a few more one-liners
from the dowager countess of Grantham, played
exquisitely by Dame Maggie Smith.
And surely, one final calamity to beset lady's
maid Anna and her butler husband Bates.
The mastermind of this runaway success is
Sir Julian Fellowes; also an actor, film director,
and, in his spare time, a conservative member
of Britain's House of Lords.
So, "Downton Abbey" coming to an end, is this
-- are you saying goodbye to a dear friend?
Or is it just -- have you already moved on?
JULIAN FELLOWES, CREATOR: No, I wouldn't
say I have moved on. I mean, "Downton" has
been an extraordinary milestone. You've
spent a lot of time in this industry, working
very hard on things that don't do terribly
well, the public doesn't get them or whatever,
and then you suddenly ring the bell. It's
been fantastic.
WOODRUFF: Fantastic beyond belief, becoming
the top-rated PBS drama of all time.
Globally, "Downton" airs in over 220 countries
with a worldwide audience of 120 million people.
FELLOWES: I never think it's a good idea to
outstay your welcome. And it seems right to
leave, so, I don't think we're doing the wrong
thing, but it's been a happy time.
WOODRUFF: A happy time with roots in a book
by American historian Carol Wallace, author
of "To Marry an English Lord," Sir Julian's
inspiration for the series.
CAROL WALLACE, AUTHOR, "“TO MARRY AN ENGLISH
LORD"”: When he had been asked by the producers
to write a series about English aristocrats,
he had been reading "To Marry an English Lord."
And he said he thought it was all very well
for these heiresses to marry, but then what
happened to them 20 years later when they
were -- I think he put it -- "freezing in
a house in Cheshire, aching for Long Island"?
And that, of course, Cora Grantham's dilemma,
there she is right there.
WOODRUFF: Wallace's book tells the true stories
of young American heiresses who left the U.S.
in the late 1800s to shop for husbands in
England. Their money attracted down at the
heels aristocrats who had titles and little
else.
What would he have seen in these stories,
in this history?
WALLACE: I think what Julian saw, the source
of the drama is exactly the asymmetry of expectation
-- what these American girls thought marriage
was going to be and what it turned out to
be, and how their American expectations kind
of, trailed along with them and formed their
relationships and their ideas of marriage
as they would 2030 years later.
WOODRUFF: The American girl of "Downton Abbey",
Cora Crawley, countess of Grantham, is played
by Elizabeth McGovern.
ELIZABETH MCGOVERN, ACTOR: I am shocked at
how sad I do feel to say goodbye to people
and houses and the family. It's been a definite
life-changing kind of time for all of us.
WOODRUFF: In what way?
MCGOVERN: Well, we've all been through something
that just felt it's had a big impact on our
personal lives and we have been in it together.
WOODRUFF: The drama began in 1912, the day
after the sinking of the Titanic, and has
proceeded through World War I, the Spanish
flu and the jazz age. Season six is set in
1925 and opens to find many formerly rich
families abandoning the life "Downton" epitomizes,
unable to afford the expanse. Like the character
she plays, McGovern is married to an Englishman
and lives in the U.K.
How is it different from other television
series?
MCGOVERN: Well, the one extraordinary difference
is that every word is written by one man.
I don't know of any other television show
that works that way. And I, to this day, find
it absolutely mindboggling.
WOODRUFF: Julian Fellowes did not intend on
being the sole writer.
FELLOWES: I was actually thrilled to get other
people to do it, but, for some reason which
I can't really explain, the series seem to
have quite a distinctive voice. And we did
try, at the beginning, to see if we could
get other people to replicate that voice.
And we tried with very good people. But it
seemed that if we wanted to sustain this particular
voice, it had to be me.
REBECCA EATON, MASTERPIECE: It's coming
from his heart, his experience, his passion.
WOODRUFF: PBS' Masterpiece presents "Downton
Abbey" in the United States, and Rebecca Eaton
is the program's executive producer.
EATON: There's a lot of heart in it. There's
a lot of generosity. These are characters
who are taking care of each other. And that
is a lot of who Julian is.
FELLOWES: We dealt with all the characters
very evenly.
We didn't say, "The family are the important
characters and the servants are the comic
relief, or servants are gallant on suffering
but the family is horrible," all of which
would have been a treatment in an earlier
period.
WOODRUFF: You give equal time to everyone,
so, in a way you're looking at that age old
struggle that we are dealing with today in
2015 about inequality, discrimination and
the rest of it. And you bring your own set
of views to that.
FELLOWES: It's this business of entitlement,
that a child of the middle or upper caste
is brought up to believe that certain things
are sort of their right, that this is the
way they will live. Whereas other people are
brought up to feel like outsiders -- "oh,
you're overreaching, so that's not for the
likes of us", and all this stuff still goes
on.
It does interests me. It shocks me and it
drives me mad when people try to pretend it
doesn't exist, because, of course, it doesn't
exist for them. There are millions of people
who are being cheated of their proper destiny
because it does still exist.
WOODRUFF: Do you think "Downton" contributes
to the conversation, to the discussion of
that?
FELLOWES: I hope it contributes. I mean, I
think in our society, particularly for the
"me-me-me generation," there is a kind of
underlined solipsism in so many of us that
the only life that's really happening is our
own. And everyone else's life is sort of dependent
on our life.
One of the important things about drama is
to remind the viewer that everyone is 100
percent at the center of their own life. That
there is no life being lived under that roof
that is more or less important; that Mary
or Daisy, what happens to them is just as
important. And that's why we have equal dramatic
weight for all the stories, to show that.
WOODRUFF: What do you think will give people
great joy and excitement and surprise, in
a good way? And what do you think will leave
people sad or devastated or disappointed?
FELLOWES: I adore these questions because
they're always asked in such optimism, as
if there is any chance that I'll answer.
I mean, of course, there are some things in
the season that will make people sad and there
are other things that will make them happy.
And Maggie will say some things that I hope
will make them laugh.
WOODRUFF: What should fans expect, the audience
expect?
MCGOVERN: I would say that the audience will
feel satisfied that they've had a chance to
say goodbye to every character in a gratifying
way. I think they'll feel full and not shortchanged.
FELLOWES: It's enough for me that people
enjoyed it, and they had a thing on Sunday
night and they would say to each other, hurry
up, "“Downton"” is starting in five minutes
or whatever. I love that.
And I think that if we all manage to produce
a show that families could watch together
and argue over the water cooler in the office
the next day, that's enough of an achievement
for me. I don't need to feel that the world
will never be the same again after "Downton,"
because it will.
WOODRUFF: And beginning the first Sunday in
January, fans can lose themselves in the lives
of the people they have come to know as friends.
SUBTITLE: Downton Abbey by the numbers: There
have been 255 cast members, 350 sets, 900
crew, and 790 filming days.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And a news update before we go,
the Pentagon announced it is investigating
airstrikes today that may have killed Iraqi
soldiers. It would be the first friendly fire
deaths since the United States began bombing
the Islamic State in Iraq.
And finally, a bit of good news as we update
our recent story on how stress may be causing
asthma among some kids.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Last week, in a joint reporting
project with the Detroit News, we profiled
Seretha Lattimore (ph) and Duane Cole (ph),
Detroit parents who had been homeless for
more than a year, often sleeping in the car
with their four youngest children. Nine-year-old's
Malik's asthma often is so severe, he'll
vomit or pass out especially on stressful
days.
MALIK COLE: I feel like I'm hurting, I'm
dying.
WOODRUFF: As the weather turned colder in
late October, Malik's condition became unmanageable.
His parents reluctantly decided to turn the
children over to Child Protective Services
until they could find stable housing. Malik
and his siblings were divided among four separate
foster homes.
Today, much of that changed. The nonprofit
Detroit Rescue Mission ministry responded
to the story by handing the family keys to
a fully-furnished, five-bedroom home. They
will be able to live there rent-free for two
years. They will then have the option to buy
the house.
The deal also comes with financial and educational
training for the parents, tutoring for the
kids, and a fully-stocked kitchen just in
time for Christmas.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: What a great story and we're going
to follow that family.
On the NEWSHOUR online, we have a new project
we're excited to share with you. It's a science
adventure story designed to be read to your
children at bedtime. For the first in our
series, we tell the tale of the scientists
who journeyed deep into an underground cave
to dig up a remarkable trove of fossils, the
bones of a mysterious species called homo
naledi.
These stories are designed to work well on
phones, tablets or to be printed out. We hope
you enjoy. All that and more is on our Web
site, pbs.org/newshour.
And a reminder about some upcoming programs
on PBS. Gwen Ifill is preparing for "Washington
Week," which airs later tonight. Here's a
preview:
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
GWEN IFILL, WASHINGTON WEEK: As an eventful
year winds to an end, the president makes
his pitch, the Democrats begin to squabble,
interest rates go up and a budget gets passed.
Oh, and then there was that Republican debate.
We'll cover it all tonight on "Washington
Week." Judy?
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: On PBS NEWSHOUR Weekend Saturday,
how the city of Boston is using real-time
data to track how well it delivers city services
to residents.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
MARTIN WALSH, MAYOR OF BOSTON: Boston as a
city does a good job, both of creating services
in different areas. But we've never measured
how we do.
REPORTER: Walsh has a large data dashboard
in his office displaying real time information
from across the city, like the number of potholes
filled and the number of community center
visits. A map shows each neighborhood Walsh
has visited this month and how often.
WALSH: I'm constantly looking at the screen.
I'm constantly looking at the measurements
of where we were in a day, where we were in
a year and looking at it. And it gives me
the opportunity to call a department head
or a manager or a cabinet chief, and ask them,
why is something so low, why is something
so high?
REPORTER: So, from your office, here at city
hall, you basically have your finger on the
pulse of what's going on?
WALSH: Every single department, every single
day.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow night, on PBS NEWHOUR
Weekend. And we'll be back, right here, on
Monday, with a look at how the synthetic drug
spice is raising havoc across America.
That's the NEWSHOUR for tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff. Have a great weekend. Thank you
and good night.